GLOSSARY
The commonly-used terminologies in the NABH standards are briey described and explained herein to remove
any ambiguity regarding their comprehension. The denitions narrated have been taken from various authentic
sources as stated, wherever possible. Notwithstanding the accuracy of the explanations given, in the event of
any discrepancy with a legal requirement enshrined in the law of the land, the provisions of the latter shall apply.
Accreditation Accreditation is self-assessment and external peer review process used by health
care organisations to accurately assess their level of performance in relation to
established standards and to implement ways to improve the health care system
continuously.
Accreditation The evaluation process for assessing the compliance of an organisation with the
assessment applicable standards for determining its accreditation status.
Advance life support Emergency medical care for sustaining life, including debrillation, airway
management, and drugs and medications.
Adverse drug A response to a drug which is noxious and unintended and which occurs at doses
reaction normally used in man for prophylaxis, diagnosis, or therapy of disease or for the
modication of physiologic function.
Adverse event An injury related to medical management, in contrast to complications of the disease.
Medical management includes all aspects of care, including diagnosis and
treatment, failure to diagnose or treat, and the systems and equipment used to
deliver care. Adverse events may be preventable or non-preventable. (WHO Draft
Guidelines for Adverse Event Reporting and Learning Systems)
Anaesthesia Death It is dened as death occurring within 24 hours of administration of anaesthesia due
to cases related to anaesthesia. However, death may occur even afterwards due to
the complications.
Assessment All activities including history taking, physical examination, laboratory investigations
that contribute towards determining the prevailing clinical status of the patient.
Barrier nursing The nursing of patients with infectious diseases in isolation to prevent the spread of
infection.
As the name implies, the aim is to erect a barrier to the passage of infectious
pathogenic organisms between the contagious patient and other patients and staff in
the hospital, and thence to the outside world. The nurses wear gowns, masks, and
gloves, and they observe strict rules that minimise the risk of passing on infectious
agents.
Basic life support Basic life support (BLS) is the level of medical care which is used for patients with
life-threatening illnesses or injuries until the patient can be given full medical care.
Breakdown Activities which are associated with the repair and servicing of site infrastructure,
maintenance buildings, plant or equipment within the site's agreed building capacity allocation
which have become inoperable or unusable because of the failure of component
parts.
Byelaws A rule governing the internal management of an organisation. It can supplement or
complement the government law but cannot countermand it, e.g. municipal by-laws
for construction of hospitals/nursing homes, for disposal of hazardous and/or
infectious waste
Calibration Set of operations that establish, under specied conditions, the relationship between
values of quantities indicated by a measuring instrument or measuring system, or
values represented by a material measure or a reference material, and the
corresponding values realised by standards.
Care Plan A plan that identies patient care needs, lists the strategy to meet those needs,
documents treatment goals and objectives, outlines the criteria for ending
interventions, and documents the individual's progress in meeting specied goals
and objectives. The format of the plan may be guided by specic policies and
procedures, protocols, practice guidelines or a combination of these. It includes
preventive, promotive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of care.
Citizen's charter Citizen's Charter is a document which represents a systematic effort to focus on the
commitment of the organisation towards its citizens in respects of standard of
services, information, choice and consultation, non-discrimination and accessibility,
grievance redress, courtesy and value for money.
(Reference: https://goicharters.nic.in/faq.htm)
Clinical audit A quality improvement process that seeks to improve patient care and outcomes
through systematic review of care against explicit criteria and the implementation of
change. (Reference: Principles for Best Practice in Clinical Audit 2002, NICE/CHI)
Clinical autopsy It is a surgical procedure that consists of an examination of a corpse by dissection to
identify the cause, mode and manner of death or to evaluate any disease or injury
that may be present for research or educational purposes.
Clinical care pathway Clinical care pathways are standardised evidence-based, multidisciplinary
management plans. They identify an appropriate sequence of clinical interventions,
timeframes, milestones and expected outcomes for a homogenous patient group.
Clinical practice Clinical practice guidelines are systematically developed statements to assist
guidelines practitioner and patient decisions about appropriate health care for specic clinical
circumstances.
Competence Demonstrated ability to apply knowledge and skills (para 3.9.2 of ISO 9000: 2015).
Knowledge is the understanding of facts and procedures. Skill is the ability to
perform a specic action.
Condentiality Restricted access to information to individuals who have a need, a reason and
permission for such access. It also includes an individual's right to personal privacy
as well as the privacy of information related to his/her healthcare records.
Consent 1. The willingness of a party to undergo examination/procedure/ treatment by a
healthcare provider. It may be implied (e.g. patient registering in OPD), expressed
which may be written or verbal. Informed consent is a type of consent in which the
healthcare provider has a duty to inform his/her patient about the procedure, its
potential risk and benets, alternative procedure with their risk and benets so as to
enable the patient to make an informed decision of his/her health care.
2. In law, it means active acquiescence or silent compliance by a person legally
capable of consenting. In India, the legal age of consent is 18 years. It may be
evidenced by words or acts or by silence when silence implies concurrence. Actual
or implied consent is necessarily an element in every contract and every agreement.
Control Charts The statistical tool used in quality control to (1) analyse and understand process
variables, (2) determine process capabilities, and to (3) monitor effects of the
variables on the difference between target and actual performance. Control charts
indicate upper and lower control limits, and often include a central (average) line, to
help detect the trend of plotted values. If all data points are within the control limits,
variations in the values may be due to a common cause and process is said to be 'in
control'. If data points fall outside the control limits, variations may be due to a special
cause, and the process is said to be out of control.
Correction Action to eliminate the detected non-conformity (Reference: ISO 9000:2015)
Corrective action Action to eliminate the cause of a non-conformity and to prevent recurrence.
(Reference: ISO 9000:2015)
Credentialing The process of obtaining, verifying and assessing the qualication of a healthcare
provider.
Data Data is a record of the event.
Discharge summary A part of a patient record that summarises the reasons for admission, signicant
clinical ndings, procedures performed, treatment rendered, patient's condition on
discharge and any specic instructions given to the patient or family (for example
follow-up medications).
Disciplinary A sequence of activities to be carried out when staff does not conform to the laid-
procedure down norms, rules and regulations of the healthcare organisation.
Drug dispensing The preparation, packaging, labelling, record keeping, and transfer of a prescription
drug to a patient or an intermediary, who is responsible for the administration of the
drug. (Reference: Mosby's Medical Dictionary, 9th edition, 2009, Elsevier.)
Drug Administration The giving of a therapeutic agent to a patient, e.g. by infusion, inhalation, injection,
paste, pessary, suppository or tablet.
Effective Effective Communication is a communication between two or more persons wherein
communication the intended message is successfully delivered, received and understood.
The effective communication also includes several other skills such as non-verbal
communication, engaged listening, ability to speak assertively, etc.
Employees All members of the healthcare organisation who are employed full time and are paid
suitable remuneration for their services as per the laid-down policy.
End-of-life Care Helps all those with an advanced, progressive, incurable illness to live as well as
possible until they die. It enables the supportive and palliative care needs of both
patient and family to be identied and met throughout the last phase of life and into
bereavement. It includes management of pain and other symptoms and provision of
psychological, social, spiritual and practical support.
Enhanced Enhanced communication is using the methods of communication to ensure
communication meaning and understanding through the recognition of the limitations of others. The
intent is to ensure purposeful, timely and reliable communication. The
communication must be sensitive, empathetic and inclusive.
Ethics Moral principles that govern a person's or group's behaviour.
Evidence-based Evidence-based medicine is the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current
medicine best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients.
Family The person(s) with a signicant role in the patient's life. It mainly includes spouse,
children and parents. It may also include a person not legally related to the patient
but can make healthcare decisions for a patient if the patient loses decision-making
ability.
Failure Mode and A method used to prospectively identify error risks within a particular process.
Effect Analysis
(FMEA)
Formulary An approved list of drugs. Drugs contained in the formulary are generally those that
are determined to be cost-effective and medically effective.
Goal A broad statement describing a desired future condition or achievement without
being specic about how much and when. (Reference: American Society for Quality)
The term “goals” refers to a future condition or performance level that one intends to
attain. Goals can be both short- and longer-term. Goals are ends that guide actions.
(Reference: Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award)
Grievance- handling The sequence of activities carried out to address the grievances of patients, visitors,
procedures relatives and staff.
Hazardous materials Substances dangerous to human and other living organisms. They include
radioactive or chemical materials.
Hazardous waste Waste materials dangerous to living organisms. Such materials require special
precautions for disposal. They include the biologic waste that can transmit disease
(for example, blood, tissues) radioactive materials, and toxic chemicals. Other
examples are infectious waste such as used needles, used bandages and uid
soaked items.
Healthcare- Healthcare-associated infection (HAI), also referred to as "nosocomial" or "hospital"
associated infection infection, is an infection occurring in a patient during the process of care in a hospital
or other health care facility which was not present or incubating at the time of
admission. (Reference: World Health Organization)
Healthcare The generic term is used to describe the various types of organisation that provide
organisation healthcare services. This includes ambulatory care centres, hospitals, laboratories,
etc.
High-dependency unit A high-dependency unit (HDU) is an area for patients who require more intensive
observation, treatment and nursing care than are usually provided for in a ward. It is a
standard of care between the ward and full intensive care.
High Risk/High Alert High-risk/high-alert medications are medications involved in a high percentage of
Medications medication errors or sentinel events and medications that carry a high risk for abuse,
error, or other adverse outcomes.
Examples include medications with a low therapeutic index, controlled substances,
psychotherapeutic medications, and look-alike and sound-alike medications.
Incident reporting It is dened as written or verbal reporting of any event in the process of patient care,
that is inconsistent with the deserved patient outcome or routine operations of the
healthcare facility.
In-service Organised education/training usually provided in the workplace for enhancing the
education/training skills of staff members or for teaching them new skills relevant to their jobs/tasks.
Indicator A statistical measure of the performance of functions, systems or processes over
time. For example, hospital acquired infection rate, mortality rate, caesarean section
rate, absence rate, etc.
Information Processed data which lends meaning to the raw data.
Intent A brief explanation of the rationale, meaning and signicance of the standards laid
down in a particular chapter.
Inventory control The method of supervising the intake, use and disposal of various goods in hands. It
relates to supervision of the supply, storage and accessibility of items in order to
ensure an adequate supply without stock-outs/excessive storage. It is also the
process of balancing ordering costs against carrying costs of the inventory so as to
minimise total costs.
Isolation Separation of an ill person who has a communicable disease (e.g.,measles,
chickenpox, mumps, SARS) from those who are healthy. Isolation prevents
transmission of infection to others and also allows the focused delivery of specialised
health care to ill patients. The period of isolation varies from disease-to-disease.
Isolation facilities can also be extended to patients for fullling their individual, unique
needs.
Job description 1. It entails an explanation pertaining to duties, responsibilities and conditions
required to perform a job.
2. A summary of the most important features of a job, including the general nature of
the work performed (duties and responsibilities) and level (i.e., skill, effort,
responsibility and working conditions) of the work performed. It typically includes
job specications that include employee characteristics required for competent
performance of the job. A job description should describe and focus on the job
itself and not on any specic individual who might ll the job.
Job specication 1. The qualications/physical requirements, experience and skills required to perform
a particular job/task.
2. A statement of the minimum acceptable qualications that an incumbent must
possess to perform a given job successfully.
Maintenance The combination of all technical and administrative actions, including supervision
actions, intended to retain an item in, or restore it to, a state in which it can perform a
required function. (Reference: British Standard 3811:1993)
Medical equipment Any xed or portable non-drug item or apparatus used for diagnosis, treatment,
monitoring and direct care of a patient.
Medication error A medication error is any preventable event that may cause or lead to inappropriate
medication use or patient harm while the medication is in the control of the health
care professional, patient, or consumer.
Such events may be related to professional practice, health care products,
procedures, and systems, including prescribing; order communication; product
labelling, packaging, and nomenclature; compounding; dispensing; distribution;
administration; education; monitoring; and use. (Reference: The National
Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention)
Medication Order A written order by a physician, dentist, or other designated health professionals for a
medication to be dispensed by a pharmacy for administration to a patient.
(Reference: Mosby's Medical Dictionary, 10th edition, Elsevier)
Mission An organisation's purpose. This refers to the overall function of an organisation. The
mission answers the question, “What is this organisation attempting to accomplish?”
The mission might dene patients, stakeholders, or markets served, distinctive or
core competencies or technologies used.
Monitoring The performance and analysis of routine measurements aimed at identifying and
detecting changes in the health status or the environment, e.g. monitoring of growth
and nutritional status, air quality in operation theatre. It requires careful planning and
use of standardised procedures and methods of data collection.
Multidisciplinary A generic term which includes representatives from various disciplines, professions
or service areas.
Near-miss A near-miss is an unplanned event that did not result in injury, illness, or damage--but
had the potential to do so.
Errors that did not result in patient harm, but could have, can be categorised as near-
misses.
No harm This is used synonymously with a near miss. However, some authors draw a
distinction between these two phrases.
A near-miss is dened when an error is realised just in the nick of time, and abortive
action is instituted to cut short its translation. In no harm scenario, the error is not
recognised, and the deed is done, but fortunately for the healthcare professional, the
expected adverse event does not occur. The distinction between the two is important
and is best exemplied by reactions to administered drugs in allergic patients. A
prophylactic injection of cephalosporin may be stopped in time because it suddenly
transpires that the patient is known to be allergic to penicillin (near-miss). If this vital
piece of information is overlooked, and the cephalosporin administered, the patient
may fortunately not develop an anaphylactic reaction (no harm event).
Notiable disease Certain specied diseases, which are required by law to be notied to the public
health authorities. Under the international health regulation (WHO's International
Health Regulations 2005), the following diseases are always notiable to WHO:
(a) Smallpox
(b) Poliomyelitis due to wild-type poliovirus
(c) Human inuenza caused by a new subtype
(d) Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).
In India, the following is an indicative list of diseases which are also notiable, but
may vary from state to state:
(a) Polio
(b) Inuenza
(c) Malaria
(d) Rabies
(e) HIV/AIDS
(f) Louse-borne typhus
(g) Tuberculosis
(h) Leprosy
(i) Leptospirosis
(j) Viral hepatitis
(k) Dengue fever
Nursing Empowerment for nurses may consist of three components: a workplace that has the
empowerment requisite structures to promote empowerment; a psychological belief in one's ability
to be empowered; and acknowledgement that there is power in the relationships and
caring that nurses provide.
It could include structural empowerment and psychological empowerment. Structural
empowerment refers to the presence or absence of empowering conditions in the
workplace. Kanter's (1993) theory of structural empowerment includes a discussion
of organisational behaviour and empowerment. According to this theory,
empowerment is promoted in work environments that provide employees with access
to information, resources, support, and the opportunity to learn and develop.
Psychological empowerment is related to a sense of motivation towards the
organisational environment, based on the dimensions of meaning, competence, self-
determination, and impact
Evidence of nursing empowerment include initiating and carrying out CPR even in
the absences of physicians, implementing standard protocols in the ICU such as
weaning a patient off ventilator, tapering or titrating inotropic as per standard
policies, nurse-led discussions during patient rounds, preparing nursing budgets,
decisions to procure equipment that aid and ease nursing care, empowered to
correct, stop non-compliance to protocols dened by the hospital.
Objective A specic statement of a desired short-term condition or achievement includes
measurable end-results to be accomplished by specic teams or individuals within
time limits. (Reference: American Society for Quality)
Objective element It is that component of standard which can be measured objectively on a rating
scale. Acceptable compliance with the measurable elements will determine the
overall compliance with the standard.
Occupational health The hazards to which an individual is exposed during the course of the performance
hazard of his job. These include physical, chemical, biological, mechanical and
psychosocial hazards.
Operational plan The operational plan is the part of your strategic plan. It denes how you will operate
in practice to implement your action and monitoring plans - what your capacity needs
are, how you will engage resources, how you will deal with risks, and how you will
ensure the sustainability of the organisation's achievements.
Organogram A graphic representation of the reporting relationship in an organisation.
Outsourcing Hiring of services and facilities from other organisation based upon one's own
requirement in areas where such facilities are either not available or else are not cost-
effective. For example, outsourcing of house-keeping, security, laboratory/certain
special diagnostic facilities. When an activity is outsourced to other institutions, there
should be a memorandum of understanding that clearly lays down the obligations of
both organisations: the one which is outsourcing and the one who is providing the
outsourced facility. It also addresses the quality-related aspects.
Patient-care setting The location where a patient is provided health care as per his needs, e.g. ICU,
speciality ward, private ward and general ward.
Patient record/ A document which contains the chronological sequence of events that a patient
medical record/ undergoes during his stay in the healthcare organisation. It includes demographic
clinical record data of the patient, assessment ndings, diagnosis, consultations, procedures
undergone, progress notes and discharge summary.
Patient-reported Patient-reported experience measures are questionnaires measuring the patients'
experience measures perceptions of their experience whilst receiving care.
(PREMs)
Patient-reported Patient-reported outcome measures are questionnaires measuring the patients' views
outcome measures of their health status.
(PROMs)
Patient Satisfaction Patient satisfaction is a measure of the extent to which a patient is content with the
health care which they received from their health care provider. Patient satisfaction is
thus a proxy but a very effective indicator to measure the success of Health care
providers.
Patient Experience Patient Experience is the sum of all interactions, shaped by an organisation's culture,
that inuence patient perceptions across the continuum of care.
It is a holistic perception that the patient forms about the healthcare provider based
on the overall interactions/ care touchpoints.
Performance It is the process of evaluating the performance of staff during a dened period of time
appraisal with the aim of ascertaining their suitability for the job, the potential for growth as well
as determining training needs.
Point of care Medical Equipment that is used to deliver care/intervene at or near the site of patient
equipment care. These are primarily Point-of-care testing (POCT), or bedside testing equipment
that helps in reducing turn-around times. POCT Machine examples; Glucometer, ABG
Analyser, Stat Lab at ICU/ER, portable USG etc.
Policies They are the guidelines for decision-making,e.g. admission, discharge policies,
antibiotic policy,etc.
Preventive action Action to eliminate the cause of a potential non-conformity. (Reference ISO
9000:2015)
Preventive It is a set of activities that are performed on plant equipment, machinery, and systems
maintenance before the occurrence of a failure in order to protect them and to prevent or eliminate
any degradation in their operating conditions.
The maintenance carried out at predetermined intervals or according to prescribed
criteria and intended to reduce the probability of failure or the degradation of the
functioning of an item.
Prescription A prescription is a document given by a physician or other healthcare practitioner in
the form of instructions that govern the care plan for an individual patient.
Legally, it is a written directive, for compounding or dispensing and administration of
drugs, or for other service to a particular patient.
(Reference: Miller-Keane Encyclopedia and Dictionary of Medicine, Nursing, and
Allied Health, Seventh Edition, Saunders)
Privileging It is the process for authorising all medical professionals to admit and treat patients
and provide other clinical services commensurate with their qualications and skills.
Privileged Condential information furnished (to facilitate diagnosis and treatment) by the
communication patient to a professional authorised by law to provide care and treatment.
Procedural sedation Procedural sedation is a technique of administering sedatives or dissociative agents
with or without analgesics to induce a state that allows the patient to tolerate
unpleasant procedures while maintaining cardiorespiratory function. Procedural
sedation and analgesia (PSA) is intended to result in a depressed level of
consciousness that allows the patient to maintain oxygenation and airway control
independently. (Reference: The American College of Emergency Physicians)
Procedure 1. A specied way to carry out an activity or a process (Para 3.4.5 of ISO 9000: 2015).
2. A series of activities for carrying out work which when observed by all help to
ensure the maximum use of resources and efforts to achieve the desired output.
Process A set of interrelated or interacting activities which transforms inputs into outputs (Para
3.4.1 of ISO 9000: 2015).
Programme A sequence of activities designed to implement policies and accomplish objectives.
Protocol A plan or a set of steps to be followed in a study, an investigation or an intervention.
Quality 1. Degree to which a set of inherent characteristics full requirements (Para 3.1.1 of
ISO 9000: 2015).
Characteristics imply a distinguishing feature (Para 3.5.1 of ISO 9000: 2015).
Requirements are a need or expectation that is stated, generally implied or obligatory
(Para 3.1.2 of ISO 9000:2015).
2. Degree of adherence to pre-established criteria or standards.
Quality assurance Part of quality management focussed on providing condence that quality
requirements will be fullled (Para 3.2.11 of ISO 9000:2015).
Quality improvement Ongoing response to quality assessment data about a service in ways that improve
the process by which services are provided to consumers/patients.
Radiation Safety Radiation safety refers to safety issues and protection from radiation hazards arising
from the handling of radioactive materials or chemicals and exposure to Ionizing and
Non-Ionizing Radiation.
This is implemented by taking steps to ensure that people will not receive excessive
doses of radiation and by monitoring all sources of radiation to which they may be
exposed.(Reference: McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientic & Technical Terms)
In a Healthcare setting, this commonly refers to X-ray machines, CT/PET CT Scans,
Electron microscopes, Particle accelerators, Cyclotron etc. Radioactive substances
and radioactive waste are also potential Hazards.
Imaging Safety includes safety measures to be taken while performing an MRI,
Radiological interventions, Sedation, Anaesthesia, Transfer of patients, Monitoring
patients during imaging procedure etc.
Re-assessment It implies a continuous and ongoing assessment of the patient, which is recorded in
the medical records as progress notes.
Reconciliation of Medication reconciliation is the process of creating the most accurate list possible of
medications all medications a patient is taking — including drug name, dosage, frequency, and
route — and comparing that list against the physician's admission, transfer, and/or
discharge orders, with the goal of providing correct medications to the patient at all
transition points within the hospital. (Reference: Institute for Healthcare Improvement)
Resources It implies all inputs in terms of men, material, money, machines, minutes (time),
methods, metres (space), skills, knowledge and information that are needed for the
efcient and effective functioning of an organisation.
Restraints Devices used to ensure safety by restricting and controlling a person's movement.
Many facilities are “restraint-free” or use alternative methods to help modify
behaviour. Restraint may be physical or chemical (by use of sedatives).
Risk abatement Risk abatement means minimising the risk or minimising the impact of that risk.
Risk assessment Risk assessment is the determination of the quantitative or qualitative value of risk
related to a concrete situation and a recognised threat (also called hazard). Risk
assessment is a step in a risk management procedure.
Risk management Clinical and administrative activities to identify, evaluate and reduce the risk of injury.
Risk mitigation Risk mitigation is a strategy to prepare for and lessen the effects of threats and
disasters. Risk mitigation takes steps to reduce the negative effects of threats and
disasters.
Risk reduction The conceptual framework of elements considered with the possibilities to minimise
vulnerabilities and disaster risks throughout society to avoid (prevention) or to limit
(mitigation and preparedness) the adverse impacts of hazards, within the broad
context of sustainable development.
It is the decrease in the risk of a healthcare facility, given activity, and treatment
process with respect to patient, staff, visitors and community.
Root Cause Analysis Root Cause Analysis (RCA) is a structured process that uncovers the physical,
(RCA) human, and latent causes of any undesirable event in the workplace. Root cause
analysis (RCA) is a method of problem-solving that tries to identify the root causes of
faults or problems that cause operating events.
RCA practice tries to solve problems by attempting to identify and correct the root
causes of events, as opposed to simply addressing their symptoms. By focusing
correction on root causes, problem recurrence can be prevented. The process
involves data collection; cause charting, root cause identication and
recommendation generation and implementation.
Safety The degree to which the risk of an intervention/procedure, in the care environment is
reduced for a patient, visitors and healthcare providers.
Safety programme A programme focused on patient, staff and visitor safety.
Scope of services Range of clinical and supportive activities that are provided by a healthcare
organisation.
Security Protection from loss, destruction, tampering, and unauthorised access or use.
Sedation The administration to an individual, in any setting for any purpose, by any route,
moderate or deep sedation. There are three levels of sedation:
Minimal sedation (anxiolysis) - A drug-induced state during which patients respond
normally to verbal commands. Although cognitive function and coordination may be
impaired, ventilatory and cardiovascular functions are not affected.
Moderate sedation/analgesia (conscious sedation) - A drug-induced depression of
consciousness during which patients respond purposefully to verbal commands
either alone or accompanied by light tactile stimulation. No interventions are needed
to maintain a patent airway.
Deep sedation/analgesia - A drug-induced depression of consciousness during
which patients cannot be easily aroused but respond purposefully after repeated or
painful stimulation. Patients may need help in maintaining a patent airway.
Sentinel events A relatively infrequent, unexpected incident, related to system or process
deciencies, which leads to death or major and enduring loss of function for a
recipient of healthcare services.
Major and enduring loss of function refers to sensory, motor, physiological, or
psychological impairment not present at the time services were sought or begun. The
impairment lasts for a minimum period of two weeks and is not related to an
underlying condition.
Social responsibility A balanced approach for an organisation to address economic, social and
environmental issues in a way that aims to benet people, communities and
society,e.g. adoption of villages for providing health care, holding of medical camps
and proper disposal of hospital wastes.
Sound clinical Practitioner decisions based on available knowledge, principles and practices for
practice specic clinical situations.
Special Educational In addition to routine carried by the healthcare professionals, patients and family
needs of the patient have special educational needs depending on the situation. For example, a post-
surgical patient who has to take care of his wound, nasogastric tube feeding, patient
on tracheostomy getting discharged who has to be taken care of by the family etc.
The special educational needs are also greatly inuenced by the literacy, educational
level, language, emotional barriers and physical and cognitive limitations. Hence it is
important for the staff to determine the special educational needs and the challenges
inuencing the effective education.
Staff All personnel working in the organisation including employees, “fee-for-service”
medical professionals, part-time workers, contractual personnel and volunteers.
Standard precautions 1. A method of infection control in which all human blood and other bodily uids are
considered infectious for HIV, HBV and other blood-borne pathogens, regardless
of patient history. It encompasses a variety of practices to prevent occupational
exposure, such as the use of personal protective equipment (PPE), disposal of
sharps and safe housekeeping
2. A set of guidelines protecting rst aiders or healthcare professionals from
pathogens. The main message is: "Don't touch or use anything that has the
victim's body uid on it without a barrier." It also assumes that all body uid of a
patient is infectious, and must be treated accordingly.
Standard Precautions apply to blood, all body uids, secretions, and excretions
(except sweat) regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood, non-intact
skin and mucous membranes
Standards A statement of expectation that denes the structures and process that must be
substantially in place in an organisation to enhance the quality of care.
Sterilisation It is the process of killing or removing microorganisms including their spores by
thermal, chemical or irradiation means.
Strategic plan Strategic planning is an organisation's process of dening its strategy or direction
and making decisions on allocating its resources to pursue this strategy, including its
capital and people. Various business analysis techniques can be used in strategic
planning, including SWOT analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and
Threats), e.g. Organisation can have a strategic plan to become a market leader in
the provision of cardiothoracic and vascular services. The resource allocation will
have to follow the pattern to achieve the target.
The process by which an organisation envisions its future and develops strategies,
goals, objectives and action plans to achieve that future.
Surveillance The continuous scrutiny of factors that determines the occurrence and distribution of
diseases and other conditions of ill health. It implies watching over with great
attention, authority and often with suspicion. It requires professional analysis and
sophisticated interpretation of data leading to recommendations for control activities.
Table-top exercise A table-top exercise is an activity in which key personnel assigned
emergency management roles and responsibilities are gathered to discuss, in a non-
threatening environment, various simulated emergency situations.
(Reference:
https://uwpd.wisc.edu/content/uploads/2014/01/What_is_a_tabletop_exercise.pdf)
Traceability Traceability is the ability to trace the history, application, use and location of an item
or its characteristics through recorded identication data. (Reference: ISO
9000:2015)
Transfusion reaction A transfusion reaction is a problem that occurs after a patient receives a transfusion
of blood.
Triage Triage is a process of prioritising patients based on the severity of their condition so
as to treat as many as possible when resources are insufcient for all to be treated
immediately.
Turn-around-time Turnaround Ttime (TAT) means the amount of time taken to complete a process or
full a request.
Unstable patient A patient whose vital parameters need external assistance for their maintenance.
Validated tool A validated tool refers to a questionnaire/scale that has been developed to be
administered among the intended respondents. The validation processes should
have been completed using a representative sample, demonstrating adequate
reliability (the ability of the instrument to produce consistent results) and validity (the
ability of the instrument to produce true results).
Validation Validation is verication, where the specied requirements are adequate for the
intended use.
Values The fundamental beliefs that drive organisational behaviour and decision-making.
This refers to the guiding principles and behaviours that embody how an organisation
and its people are expected to operate. Values reect and reinforce the desired
culture of an organisation.
Verbal order Verbal orders are those orders given by a physician with prescriptive authority to a
licensed person who is authorised by the organisation.
Verication Verication is the provision of objective evidence that a given item fulls specied
requirements.
Vision An overarching statement of the way an organisation wants to be, an ideal state of
being at a future point.
This refers to the desired future state of an organisation. The vision describes where
the organisation is headed, what it intends to be, or how it wishes to be perceived in
the future.
Vulnerable patient Those patients who are prone to injury and disease by virtue of their age, sex,
physical, mental and immunological status,e.g. infants, elderly, physically- and
mentally-challenged, semiconscious/unconscious, those on immunosuppressive
and/or chemotherapeutic agents.
Workplace violence Incidents where staff are abused, threatened or assaulted in circumstances related to
their work, including commuting to and from work, involving an explicit or implicit
challenge to their safety, well-being or health. (Adapted from European Commission)
